# An Exploration of Humor in Ms. Fr. 640

Charlotte Atkins and Siobhan Joyce-Farley, Fall 2021

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BFK71x0bvuE" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>


When we decided to recreate and record riddles from Ms. Fr. 640 for our
final project, our major interests were exploring accessible entry
points into the manuscript and thinking about how modes of entertainment
have and haven’t evolved across location and history. We thought that
riddles and practical jokes would be easy to recreate authentically, and
we assumed that their societal function would have stayed relatively
fixed across time. Once we actually began to research and film the
riddles, however, we realized our initial assumptions weren’t totally
correct.

A huge help to us in understanding the societal context surrounding the
riddles in the manuscript was Ann-Sophie Barwich’s “Sleight of Hand
Tricks” essay. It was extremely helpful in explaining the often serious
implications that riddles and magic tricks had in the sixteenth century
– we had no idea that some tricks were considered malevolent or demonic,
and even though these kinds of tricks weren’t the ones we recreated, the
additional context was very useful. The essay also categorized the
manuscript riddles into types, including the four riddles we selected.
We chose ones from 34r, three “physical riddles” (finger on forehead,
candlestick, and log) and one “mental riddle” (boots without spurs).

Recreating the riddles was fairly straightforward. The trickiest riddle
to replicate was the candlestick riddle, not just because we lacked some
physical materials (the candlestick, a servant) but because the riddle
originally relied on a language pun that doesn’t translate in English –
luckily the friend Charlotte performed the riddle on speaks French and
was able to explain the joke for the video. Despite this, the riddle
still worked on a more basic level (reversing expectations, exploiting
assumptions made by the pranked person) and the ways it failed are still
notable and worthy of mention. Many of the riddles translate to the
present day as well as the more technical recipes do, but others don’t,
and that’s okay too.

After performing some of the riddles we still believe they’re a great
entry point into the manuscript. The entries emphasize that the desire
to entertain in a social setting and have fun with friends isn’t a
modern creation, and some of the riddles are strikingly similar to ones
that float around middle schools today. Reflecting on the “boot without
spurs” riddle (in which a person is challenged to say “boot without
spurs” and fails because the joke is to say “boot” without saying
“spurs”), a pranked friend remarked that it reminded her of the “spell
ICUP” joke, where the pranked person is laughed at for saying the
letters I-C-U-P. We think she’s right, “ICUP” could absolutely qualify
as a mental riddle. The riddles reminded us of anti-jokes, in which the
point is to anticipate the answerer’s response and negate it, making fun
of the joke while still being a joke. The riddles simultaneously
distance themselves from and participate in pranking, kind of like how
other recipes in the manuscript counterfeit objects in such a way that
the object’s exact likeness is replicated. While performing a riddle
might not seem at first like a form of making, the riddles actually
follow in Ms. Fr. 640’s throughline of mimicking in form while differing
in substance. To perform a riddle is to replicate collected knowledge,
and this holds true if performed in the sixteenth century or the modern
day. For its simplicity and thematic resonance with Ms. Fr. 640 as a
whole, we recommend riddling as an introduction to the manuscript.
